# Mott variable-range hopping based calibration procedure for NTC thermistors in wide cryogenic temperature range

**Authors:** Emanuele Taralli; Sven Visser; Roland den Hartog; Paul van der Hulst
**Journal:** Measurement
**Date:** 2026-04-21
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.measurement.2026.120853](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2026.120853)

## Abstract

In this paper we propose a procedure based on the Mott variable-range hopping model that describes the low-temperature conduction in strongly disordered systems such as negative temperature coefficient (NTC) thermistors. This procedure offers a close approximation to the physical model and provides an accurate R ( T ) fit for the resistance − temperature data over three orders of magnitude temperature range (0.04 K — 40 K) using only 4 fit coefficients. Eventually, the temperature corresponding to any resistance value of the thermistor T ( R ) can be determined with an approximation of an inverted R ( T ) function based on a Puiseux series expansion. This approach has been showed to be applicable to different NTC thermistors, including ruthenium oxide (RuO 2 ) and germanium (Ge) resistors with a range of resistance values. It provides a root mean square of the relative residual of the fit Δ T rel RMS ≤ 1 % and Δ T rel RMS ≤ 1 . 7 % using a n fit ∈ [ 4 , 10 ] and n fit = 4 fit coefficients for RuO 2 and Ge, respectively. Previously reported procedures for the calibration of resistance-temperature data in low-temperature thermistors do not reach this accuracy with a similar number of fit coefficients.

**Keywords:** NTC thermistors, Calibration equation, Mott variable-range hopping, Cryogenic temperature, Athena/X-IFU

## 1 Introduction

Dilution and adiabatic demagnetisation refrigerators are widely used below 40 K in the study of condensed matter, high resolution spectroscopy and quantum technologies. There is thus a need to routinely measure such low temperatures and to control the temperature stability of the stage on which an experiment is mounted. One example is the Athena X-ray Integral Field Unit (X-IFU) which is a high resolution X-ray spectrometer planned to be launched in the mid-30s on the Athena X-ray Observatory [1] . An important aspect of the X-IFU Focal Plane Assembly is the proper suspension of the coldest detector stage (55 mK) and an intermediate heat intercept stage (300 mK) from its outer structure (2 K) by means of stiff, strong and thermally insulating Kevlar cords [2,3] .
In order to meet the thermal requirements specified by the application, it is essential to use thermistors with high sensitivity to achieve high resolution and high accuracy over a wide range of temperatures. In addition to the accurate temperature measurement, thermistors shall be operated in a PID control loop to stabilise the detectors’ operating temperature at a fixed target. The choice of the thermistor is thereby essential, as is the calibration equation used to describe the relationship between its resistance and temperature, which can severely affect the accuracy. Beyond this, we have a need for good relative calibration between thermistors to ensure that a set of thermometers, distributed over the instrument and calibrated against the same reference thermometer, give consistent readings over a targeted temperature range.
In contrast to the common comparisons of the fitting agreement provided by different calibration equations to resistance $-$ temperature data in a temperature range above 270 K [4–8] , we focus here on a wide range of cryogenic temperatures 0.04 K–40 K. A number of negative temperature coefficient (NTC) thermistors, in particular ruthenium oxide (RuO $_{2}$ ) and germanium (Ge) resistors (with different resistance ranges) have been considered and tested. Such NTC thermistors can be highly non-linear over this temperature range, showing a dimensionless sensitivity $\\alpha = \\frac{d log R}{d log T}$ that can vary considerably, with larger value at low temperatures. Extended series expansions of the basic two-parameters exponential equations [9] can be used to fit the whole temperature range, but even though the polynomial degree can be kept reasonably low, i.e. $\<$ 20 for the whole range, the accuracy achieved might be insufficient. Purely phenomenological models can also be considered, but they usually work well only in a range of temperature where $\\alpha$ is linear, when plotted on a log–log scale against $T$ . Another option is to divide the resistance $-$ temperature data in several temperature intervals to be fitted with different polynomial equations, e.g. Chebyshev, in order to keep the polynomial degree per interval low enough, i.e. $\<$ 10, to ensure accuracy and manageable calculation [10] . However, all of these options can only provide an empirical representation of the resistance $-$ temperature data. Moreover, they are used to obtain the temperature as the final product of the fit, although from a physics point of view, the resistance of a thermistor is the dependent variable measured for a given independent temperature, e.g. liquid He.
The approach presented here is based on the Mott variable-range hopping model. It provides an $R ( T )$ fit function for the resistance-temperature relationship as the closest approximation to the low temperature behaviour of the resistivity in strongly disordered systems where states are localised, giving a physics basis for the selected function. After determining the inverse of the function $R ( T )$ , a Puiseux series is applied to find an approximation of the inverted function $T ( R )$ to determine the temperature as a function of the thermistor resistance. This approach yields high accuracy over the full temperature range with a limited number of fit coefficients.
A comparison between these calibration equations considers parameters estimated using ordinary least-squares method and their performance has been compared plotting the relative deviation of the fit (relative residual) $Δ T_{rel}$ and evaluating the root-mean-square of the relative deviation $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}$ .
We show eventually the possibility to apply the same type of thermistor to different temperature stages which, in combination with a unique calibration function, can guarantee accurate measurement reading and secure the temperature stability for the coldest temperature stage to ensure that an experimental setup can perform with the highest possible performance.

## 2 Mott Variable-Range Hopping based (MVRH) model

In this section we present our calibration procedure based on the Mott variable-range hopping (MVRH), which is a model describing the low temperature carrier transport in disordered semiconductors in a extended temperature range [11] . For NTC thermistors like RuO $\_{2}$ or Ge, it has been demonstrated that their physics may be approximately described by the Mott variable-range hopping model [12] .

### 2.1 Principles behind the MVRH model

We start our calibration procedure considering the resistance of the thermistor that we aim to calibrate as a function of temperature.
In 1968 Mott [11] introduced the concept of a type of hopping conduction at very low temperatures where the typical resistances between neighbouring impurities become larger than those connecting some remote impurities whose energy levels happen to be very close to the Fermi level [13] . In this case the characteristic hopping length increases at lower temperature, and the temperature dependence of the conduction ( $\\sigma = R^{- 1}$ ), indexed by the dimensions of a spatial subspace $d$ $=$ 0,1,2,3, exhibits the following behaviour: $$ \\sigma = \\sigma\_{0 , d} ( T ) ⋅ exp − τ d T d + 1 $$ where originally $\\sigma\_{0 , d} ( T )$ and $\\tau\_{d}$ are material properties given by the model [14] . In addition to the original Mott variable-range hopping (VRH) model, electron–electron interactions may lead to the formation of a Coulomb gap in the density of states, giving rise to the Efros–Shklovskii (ES) VRH mechanism, which modifies the effective hopping exponent [13] . ES-VRH has been reported in several disordered semiconducting systems, including germanium-based materials under specific conditions such as strong magnetic fields or reduced dimensionality [12,14–16] . From the perspective of the present work, both Mott and ES VRH fall within the general exponential framework expressed in Eq. (1) . The aim of this study is not to distinguish between microscopic hopping mechanisms, but to exploit a physically motivated functional form that accurately describes the resistance–temperature relationship over a wide cryogenic temperature range.
Several experiments [14–16] have found that the prefactors $\\sigma\_{0 , d} ( T )$ are constant over wide-ranges of temperatures, an assumption that we apply below. We can then combine the different contributions (Eq. (1) ) to the total conduction by summing over $d$ : $$ \\sigma = R^{- 1} = ∑ d = 0 3 \\sigma\_{0 , d} ⋅ exp − τ d T d + 1 $$ This is equivalent to assuming that electrons with a given energy only interact according to a model with a given constant $d$ $=$ 0, 1, 2, 3, and allowing the fitting procedure to determine the dimensionality of the hopping process. In order to realise a Taylor expansion for Eq. (2) we need to choose a substitution for $\\sigma^{- 1}$ and $T$ that is isomorphic and differentiable, with an inverse map having the same characteristics as the original map. Because $\\sigma$ has a significant exponential behaviour, we define $x = ln ( R / R\_{0} ) = - ln ( R\_{0} ⋅ \\sigma )$ , where $R\_{0}$ is a freely chosen constant. We define $y = T^{- 1 / 12}$ because each occurrence of $- \\tau\_{d} / T d + 1$ is a polynomial in $y$ and 12 is the lowest common denominator of the exponents of $T$ , i.e. −1/( $d +$ 1). In this way, we obtain: $$ x ( y ) = - ln R 0 ⋅ ∑ d = 0 3 σ 0 , d ⋅ exp − τ d ⋅ y 12 d + 1 ≈ ∑ k = 0 ∞ c\_{k} ⋅ y^{k} . $$ From the Taylor series expansion in Eq. (3) , we can identify some restrictions on the $c\_{k}$ as listed in Table 1 . In particular for $0 \\leq k \\leq 6$ , the non-zero $c\_{k}$ are independent of each other, while for $k \\geq 7$ , correlations between the fitting coefficients arise, even though it could lead to a better fit.

### 2.2 Function for R ( T )

To obtain the fit to the thermistor resistance $R ( T )$ as a function of the temperature, we use the model functions in Eq. (3) , in the form: $$ ln \\frac{R ( T )}{R\_{0}} = ∑ k ≠ 1 , 2 , 5 n c\_{k} ⋅ T^{- k / 12} $$ where for $k = 1 , 2 , 5$ the coefficients $c\_{k} = 0$ . We find the nonzero coefficients by applying a least-squares fit to minimise $S\_{fit}$ over the $N$ measured data points: $$ S\_{fit} = ∑ i = 1 N ln R ( T meas i ) R 0 − ln R meas i R 0^{2} $$

### 2.3 Inverse function T ( R )

In practice, we would like to have a calibration function that maps resistance to temperature, inverting $R ( T )$ as expressed in Eq. (4) by means of a polynomial approximation. A good option is to make a small set of truncated Puiseux series expansions [17] of $y ( x )$ , each around some chosen $x ≈ x\_{0}$ .
Each of these Puiseux series expansions is actually just a Taylor expansion of $y ( x )$ as a function of $( x - x\_{0} )^{1 / r}$ (or $( x\_{0} - x )^{1 / r}$ ) for some specially found ramification index $r$ . It will coincide with the Taylor series expansion for $r$ $=$ 1, when $d y ( x ) / d x$ is finite at $x\_{0}$ .
Due to the complexity and difficulty to implement the above algorithm, we apply a different approach. Starting from the fit Eq. (4) as $x ( y )$ , we find the points where $x ( y )$ has responsivity of $d y ( x ) / d x = 0$ . We define $y\_{0 -}$ as the zero-responsivity just below the measured interval, and $y\_{0 +}$ as the zero-responsivity just above the measured interval. From that we also define both $x\_{0 ±} = x ( y\_{0 ±} )$ . Then the considered truncated Puiseux series expansions are 1 1 If either one of the $y\_{0 ±}$ does not exist, then one can ignore the corresponding $y\_{f i t ±} ( x )$ , and just use the other $y\_{f i t ∓} ( x )$ . : $$ y\_{fit\_{-}} ( x ) = y\_{0\_{-}} + ∑ k = 1 n − d\_{k\_{-}} ⋅ ( x - x\_{0\_{-}} )^{k / r\_{-}} $$ $$ y\_{fit\_{-}} ( x ) = y\_{0\_{-}} + ∑ k = 1 n − d\_{k\_{-}} ⋅ ( x - x\_{0\_{-}} )^{k / r\_{-}} $$ $$ y\_{fit\_{+}} ( x ) = y\_{0\_{+}} + ∑ k = 1 n + d\_{k\_{+}} ⋅ ( x\_{0\_{+}} - x )^{k / r\_{+}} $$
Parameters $n\_{±}$ need to be set large enough to ensure convergence in the truncated series. In practice we found that a value of 10 is sufficient. Parameters $r\_{±}$ are set to integer multiple of $m\_{±}$ in such a way that (from Eq. (4) ) $∓ ( x ( y ) - x\_{0 ±} )$ can be locally described by $( y - y\_{0 ±} )^{m\_{±}}$ for $y ≈ y\_{0 ±}$ .
Rewriting Eqs. (6) using $R$ and $T$ and combining them in a general formulation we have:
$$ T ( R )_{±}^{- 1 / 12} = T_{0\_{±}}^{- 1 / 12} + ∑ k = 0 n ± d\_{k\_{±}} ⋅ | ln \\frac{R}{R\_{0\_{±}}} |^{k / r\_{±}} $$
The coefficients $d\_{k\_{±}}$ are then determined by a least-squares fit to minimise $S\_{fit\_{±}}$ over the $N$ measured data points: $$ S\_{fit\_{±}} = ∑ i = 1 N y ± ( x ( y meas i ) ) − y meas i^{2} $$ This does not introduce an extra dependency on the measured values, except on their distribution.
In the end, we define $T ( R )$ as either $y\_{fit\_{-}} ( x )$ or $y\_{fit\_{+}} ( x )$ depending on which one has the smallest $S\_{fit}$ .
Although the calibration procedure is physically motivated by variable-range hopping transport, the fitting coefficients introduced in Eqs. (4) and (7) are not intended to be interpreted as direct microscopic transport parameters. Rather, they should be regarded as effective quantities that capture the dominant temperature dependence of the resistance over a wide cryogenic range. In practice, we find that the magnitude and sign of the leading coefficients are consistent across thermistors of the same material family, and remain stable under repeated fits or when the fitting procedure is applied to comparable resistance–temperature datasets. This consistency supports the use of the proposed formulation as a physically grounded and metrologically robust calibration model, even though a one-to-one correspondence with specific transport parameters is neither required nor assumed.

## 2.1 Principles behind the MVRH model

We start our calibration procedure considering the resistance of the thermistor that we aim to calibrate as a function of temperature.
In 1968 Mott [11] introduced the concept of a type of hopping conduction at very low temperatures where the typical resistances between neighbouring impurities become larger than those connecting some remote impurities whose energy levels happen to be very close to the Fermi level [13] . In this case the characteristic hopping length increases at lower temperature, and the temperature dependence of the conduction ( $\\sigma = R^{- 1}$ ), indexed by the dimensions of a spatial subspace $d$ $=$ 0,1,2,3, exhibits the following behaviour: $$ \\sigma = \\sigma\_{0 , d} ( T ) ⋅ exp − τ d T d + 1 $$ where originally $\\sigma\_{0 , d} ( T )$ and $\\tau\_{d}$ are material properties given by the model [14] . In addition to the original Mott variable-range hopping (VRH) model, electron–electron interactions may lead to the formation of a Coulomb gap in the density of states, giving rise to the Efros–Shklovskii (ES) VRH mechanism, which modifies the effective hopping exponent [13] . ES-VRH has been reported in several disordered semiconducting systems, including germanium-based materials under specific conditions such as strong magnetic fields or reduced dimensionality [12,14–16] . From the perspective of the present work, both Mott and ES VRH fall within the general exponential framework expressed in Eq. (1) . The aim of this study is not to distinguish between microscopic hopping mechanisms, but to exploit a physically motivated functional form that accurately describes the resistance–temperature relationship over a wide cryogenic temperature range.
Several experiments [14–16] have found that the prefactors $\\sigma\_{0 , d} ( T )$ are constant over wide-ranges of temperatures, an assumption that we apply below. We can then combine the different contributions (Eq. (1) ) to the total conduction by summing over $d$ : $$ \\sigma = R^{- 1} = ∑ d = 0 3 \\sigma\_{0 , d} ⋅ exp − τ d T d + 1 $$ This is equivalent to assuming that electrons with a given energy only interact according to a model with a given constant $d$ $=$ 0, 1, 2, 3, and allowing the fitting procedure to determine the dimensionality of the hopping process. In order to realise a Taylor expansion for Eq. (2) we need to choose a substitution for $\\sigma^{- 1}$ and $T$ that is isomorphic and differentiable, with an inverse map having the same characteristics as the original map. Because $\\sigma$ has a significant exponential behaviour, we define $x = ln ( R / R\_{0} ) = - ln ( R\_{0} ⋅ \\sigma )$ , where $R\_{0}$ is a freely chosen constant. We define $y = T^{- 1 / 12}$ because each occurrence of $- \\tau\_{d} / T d + 1$ is a polynomial in $y$ and 12 is the lowest common denominator of the exponents of $T$ , i.e. −1/( $d +$ 1). In this way, we obtain: $$ x ( y ) = - ln R 0 ⋅ ∑ d = 0 3 σ 0 , d ⋅ exp − τ d ⋅ y 12 d + 1 ≈ ∑ k = 0 ∞ c\_{k} ⋅ y^{k} . $$ From the Taylor series expansion in Eq. (3) , we can identify some restrictions on the $c\_{k}$ as listed in Table 1 . In particular for $0 \\leq k \\leq 6$ , the non-zero $c\_{k}$ are independent of each other, while for $k \\geq 7$ , correlations between the fitting coefficients arise, even though it could lead to a better fit.

## 2.2 Function for R ( T )

To obtain the fit to the thermistor resistance $R ( T )$ as a function of the temperature, we use the model functions in Eq. (3) , in the form: $$ ln \\frac{R ( T )}{R\_{0}} = ∑ k ≠ 1 , 2 , 5 n c\_{k} ⋅ T^{- k / 12} $$ where for $k = 1 , 2 , 5$ the coefficients $c\_{k} = 0$ . We find the nonzero coefficients by applying a least-squares fit to minimise $S\_{fit}$ over the $N$ measured data points: $$ S\_{fit} = ∑ i = 1 N ln R ( T meas i ) R 0 − ln R meas i R 0^{2} $$

## 2.3 Inverse function T ( R )

In practice, we would like to have a calibration function that maps resistance to temperature, inverting $R ( T )$ as expressed in Eq. (4) by means of a polynomial approximation. A good option is to make a small set of truncated Puiseux series expansions [17] of $y ( x )$ , each around some chosen $x ≈ x\_{0}$ .
Each of these Puiseux series expansions is actually just a Taylor expansion of $y ( x )$ as a function of $( x - x\_{0} )^{1 / r}$ (or $( x\_{0} - x )^{1 / r}$ ) for some specially found ramification index $r$ . It will coincide with the Taylor series expansion for $r$ $=$ 1, when $d y ( x ) / d x$ is finite at $x\_{0}$ .
Due to the complexity and difficulty to implement the above algorithm, we apply a different approach. Starting from the fit Eq. (4) as $x ( y )$ , we find the points where $x ( y )$ has responsivity of $d y ( x ) / d x = 0$ . We define $y\_{0 -}$ as the zero-responsivity just below the measured interval, and $y\_{0 +}$ as the zero-responsivity just above the measured interval. From that we also define both $x\_{0 ±} = x ( y\_{0 ±} )$ . Then the considered truncated Puiseux series expansions are 1 1 If either one of the $y\_{0 ±}$ does not exist, then one can ignore the corresponding $y\_{f i t ±} ( x )$ , and just use the other $y\_{f i t ∓} ( x )$ . : $$ y\_{fit\_{-}} ( x ) = y\_{0\_{-}} + ∑ k = 1 n − d\_{k\_{-}} ⋅ ( x - x\_{0\_{-}} )^{k / r\_{-}} $$ $$ y\_{fit\_{-}} ( x ) = y\_{0\_{-}} + ∑ k = 1 n − d\_{k\_{-}} ⋅ ( x - x\_{0\_{-}} )^{k / r\_{-}} $$ $$ y\_{fit\_{+}} ( x ) = y\_{0\_{+}} + ∑ k = 1 n + d\_{k\_{+}} ⋅ ( x\_{0\_{+}} - x )^{k / r\_{+}} $$
Parameters $n\_{±}$ need to be set large enough to ensure convergence in the truncated series. In practice we found that a value of 10 is sufficient. Parameters $r\_{±}$ are set to integer multiple of $m\_{±}$ in such a way that (from Eq. (4) ) $∓ ( x ( y ) - x\_{0 ±} )$ can be locally described by $( y - y\_{0 ±} )^{m\_{±}}$ for $y ≈ y\_{0 ±}$ .
Rewriting Eqs. (6) using $R$ and $T$ and combining them in a general formulation we have:
$$ T ( R )_{±}^{- 1 / 12} = T_{0\_{±}}^{- 1 / 12} + ∑ k = 0 n ± d\_{k\_{±}} ⋅ | ln \\frac{R}{R\_{0\_{±}}} |^{k / r\_{±}} $$
The coefficients $d\_{k\_{±}}$ are then determined by a least-squares fit to minimise $S\_{fit\_{±}}$ over the $N$ measured data points: $$ S\_{fit\_{±}} = ∑ i = 1 N y ± ( x ( y meas i ) ) − y meas i^{2} $$ This does not introduce an extra dependency on the measured values, except on their distribution.
In the end, we define $T ( R )$ as either $y\_{fit\_{-}} ( x )$ or $y\_{fit\_{+}} ( x )$ depending on which one has the smallest $S\_{fit}$ .
Although the calibration procedure is physically motivated by variable-range hopping transport, the fitting coefficients introduced in Eqs. (4) and (7) are not intended to be interpreted as direct microscopic transport parameters. Rather, they should be regarded as effective quantities that capture the dominant temperature dependence of the resistance over a wide cryogenic range. In practice, we find that the magnitude and sign of the leading coefficients are consistent across thermistors of the same material family, and remain stable under repeated fits or when the fitting procedure is applied to comparable resistance–temperature datasets. This consistency supports the use of the proposed formulation as a physically grounded and metrologically robust calibration model, even though a one-to-one correspondence with specific transport parameters is neither required nor assumed.

## 3 Calibration equations under test

In this section we present the calibration equations considered for the comparison against our MVRH calibration in order to identify the most suitable and robust in describing the relationships between the thermistor resistance and temperature. All the calibration equations are summarised in Table 2 .

### 3.1 The basic Equation (BE) or two-parameters exponential equation

The two-parameters exponential equation, also called the Basic Equation, is defined as follow: $$ R ( T ) = R ( T\_{0} ) ⋅ exp β 1 T − 1 T 0 $$ and for high-accuracy applications, two extended series expansions can be derived from it: $$ ln \\frac{R}{R\_{0}} = ∑ k = 0 n \\frac{a\_{k}^{′}}{T^{k}} $$ and $$ T ( R )^{- 1} = ∑ k = 0 n a\_{k} ⋅ ln R R 0^{k} $$ where $a\_{k}^{′}$ and $a\_{k}$ are coefficients and R $_{0}$ is a convenient reference resistance, e.g. 1 $\\Omega$ or 1 k $\\Omega$ , depending on the measurement units [9] or on the thermistor resistance at room temperature [18] . The extension of the series in the above equations is chosen according to the temperature range and the accuracy required. Note that Eq. (11) with $k$ $=$ 3 and $a_{2}$ $=$ 0 is the Steinhart and Hart equation [19] which is suggested by manufacturers and used over small ranges of temperatures (tens of Kelvin) [20] . However it is not explicitly considered in this paper because it turned out to provide poor performance [21] and it is based on numerical error [9,22] .
Consider also that because $k$ is integer, there is no need to use Puiseux series to invert from $R ( T )$ to $T ( R )$ and that Eq. (9) is Eq. (1) when $d$ $=$ 0.

### 3.2 Chebyshev polynomials (CP)

A resistance $-$ temperature relationship can be represented by a polynomial equation based on the Chebyshev polynomials: $$ T ( w ) = ∑ k = 0 n b\_{k} ⋅ t\_{k} ( w ) $$ where $T ( w )$ is the temperature, $t\_{k} ( w )$ and $b\_{k}$ are the Chebyshev polynomials and coefficients, respectively, while the parameter $w$ is a normalised variable given by: $$ w = \\frac{( log\_{10} ( R ) - Z\_{L} ) - ( Z\_{U} - log\_{10} ( R ) )}{Z\_{U} - Z\_{L}} $$ This representation is commonly used in calibration reports for commercially available thermistors [10] and it is also common to see calibration curves that are piecewise first order polynomials of the form of Eq. (12) , but for smaller ranges. Different temperature ranges are required to accurately describe the resistance $-$ temperature curve, where the logarithm (base 10) of the lower and upper limit of the resistance over the fit range are $Z\_{L}$ and $Z\_{U}$ , respectively [10] . Eventually, the Chebyshev polynomials are given by: $$ T ( w ) = ∑ k = 0 n b\_{k} ⋅ cos [ k ⋅ arcos ( w ) ] $$

### 3.3 Phenomenological model (PM)

NTC thermistors are generally characterised by a linear dimensionless sensitivity $\\alpha$ over a limited range of temperature. A full derivation of the PM is reported in Appendix , while $R ( T )$ and $T ( R )$ are reported here for simplicity: $$ R ( T ) = R\_{0} ⋅ exp α 0 b ⋅ T T 0 − 1 $$ where R $_{0}$ and T $_{0}$ are some reference pair of temperature and resistance. Note that Eq. (15) is essentially a 3-parameter model, which analytically inverted (no need of Puiseux series) can eventually provide the desired $T ( R )$ as: $$ T ( R ) = T\_{0} b α 0 ln R − ln R 0 + 1^{1 / b} $$

## 3.1 The basic Equation (BE) or two-parameters exponential equation

The two-parameters exponential equation, also called the Basic Equation, is defined as follow: $$ R ( T ) = R ( T\_{0} ) ⋅ exp β 1 T − 1 T 0 $$ and for high-accuracy applications, two extended series expansions can be derived from it: $$ ln \\frac{R}{R\_{0}} = ∑ k = 0 n \\frac{a\_{k}^{′}}{T^{k}} $$ and $$ T ( R )^{- 1} = ∑ k = 0 n a\_{k} ⋅ ln R R 0^{k} $$ where $a\_{k}^{′}$ and $a\_{k}$ are coefficients and R $_{0}$ is a convenient reference resistance, e.g. 1 $\\Omega$ or 1 k $\\Omega$ , depending on the measurement units [9] or on the thermistor resistance at room temperature [18] . The extension of the series in the above equations is chosen according to the temperature range and the accuracy required. Note that Eq. (11) with $k$ $=$ 3 and $a_{2}$ $=$ 0 is the Steinhart and Hart equation [19] which is suggested by manufacturers and used over small ranges of temperatures (tens of Kelvin) [20] . However it is not explicitly considered in this paper because it turned out to provide poor performance [21] and it is based on numerical error [9,22] .
Consider also that because $k$ is integer, there is no need to use Puiseux series to invert from $R ( T )$ to $T ( R )$ and that Eq. (9) is Eq. (1) when $d$ $=$ 0.

## 3.2 Chebyshev polynomials (CP)

A resistance $-$ temperature relationship can be represented by a polynomial equation based on the Chebyshev polynomials: $$ T ( w ) = ∑ k = 0 n b\_{k} ⋅ t\_{k} ( w ) $$ where $T ( w )$ is the temperature, $t\_{k} ( w )$ and $b\_{k}$ are the Chebyshev polynomials and coefficients, respectively, while the parameter $w$ is a normalised variable given by: $$ w = \\frac{( log\_{10} ( R ) - Z\_{L} ) - ( Z\_{U} - log\_{10} ( R ) )}{Z\_{U} - Z\_{L}} $$ This representation is commonly used in calibration reports for commercially available thermistors [10] and it is also common to see calibration curves that are piecewise first order polynomials of the form of Eq. (12) , but for smaller ranges. Different temperature ranges are required to accurately describe the resistance $-$ temperature curve, where the logarithm (base 10) of the lower and upper limit of the resistance over the fit range are $Z\_{L}$ and $Z\_{U}$ , respectively [10] . Eventually, the Chebyshev polynomials are given by: $$ T ( w ) = ∑ k = 0 n b\_{k} ⋅ cos [ k ⋅ arcos ( w ) ] $$

## 3.3 Phenomenological model (PM)

NTC thermistors are generally characterised by a linear dimensionless sensitivity $\\alpha$ over a limited range of temperature. A full derivation of the PM is reported in Appendix , while $R ( T )$ and $T ( R )$ are reported here for simplicity: $$ R ( T ) = R\_{0} ⋅ exp α 0 b ⋅ T T 0 − 1 $$ where R $_{0}$ and T $_{0}$ are some reference pair of temperature and resistance. Note that Eq. (15) is essentially a 3-parameter model, which analytically inverted (no need of Puiseux series) can eventually provide the desired $T ( R )$ as: $$ T ( R ) = T\_{0} b α 0 ln R − ln R 0 + 1^{1 / b} $$

## 4 Comparison

The resistance $-$ temperature data used in this work were obtained by measuring the resistance of four different thermistors as a function of the temperature provided by a calibrated RX-102B-RS-0.01B thermometer from Lakeshore, for temperatures $T$ $∈$ [0.04 K, 40 K].
We selected thermistors based on the two most common NTC materials used for low temperature thermometry (RuO $_{2}$ and Ge) and aiming for a generally applicable comparison, we tried to cover a range of resistances and dimensionless sensitivities as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Ge thermistors are characterised by a strongly nonlinear $\\alpha$ with a sudden minimum between 5 K and 15 K. As mentioned in Section 2.3 , to invert the $R ( T )$ curve using Puiseux series expansion, we need to find the points just below ( $y_{0 -}$ ) and just above ( $y\_{0 +}$ ) the measured interval where $d R ( T ) / d T$ $=$ 0. Unfortunately, the presence of an additional zero point in the derivative between 5 K and 15 K makes the use of Puiseux series expansion unfeasible over the full temperature range. For this reason, we restrict the fitting of the inverted function $T ( R )$ to 5 K for these Ge thermistors. Nevertheless, Fig. 1 (b) already shows the potential of the MVRH method (Eq. (4) ) to fit the $R ( T )$ curve using only 9 fit coefficients, indicating that the MVRH method can actually describe the low temperature conductivity for the whole temperature range. Neither the Basic equation in the form of Eq. (10) nor the phenomenological model of Eq. (15) are able to converge over this full range, while a Chebyshev polynomial needs more than 100 fit coefficients to describe the curve, and with strong oscillations at low temperature. For a fair comparison we restrict the temperature range for the Ge thermistor from 0.04 K to 5 K.
The thermistors under test are the following:
• A Vishay Dale RuO $_{2}$ resistor RCW-575-40 with resistance $R$ $∈$ [1 k $\\Omega$ , 13 k $\\Omega$ ] and $\\alpha ∈$ [0.5, 0.018] for a temperature range $T$ $∈$ [0.04 K, 40 K]. • A Lakeshore RuO $_{2}$ resistor RX-102A-BR with resistance $R$ $∈$ [1 k $\\Omega$ , 60 k $\\Omega$ ] and $\\alpha ∈$ [1.5, 0.5] for a temperature range $T$ $∈$ [0.04 K, 40 K]. • Two Lakeshore Ge resistors GE-50-AA#1 and GE-50-AA#2 with resistance $R$ $∈$ [20 $\\Omega$ , 100 k $\\Omega$ ] and $R$ $∈$ [20 $\\Omega$ , 200 k $\\Omega$ ], respectively and $\\alpha ∈$ [6.5, 0.2] for a temperature range $T$ $∈$ [0.04 K, 5 K].
All thermistors investigated in this study were subjected to 20 repeated thermal cycling between 300 K and 77 K, prior to calibration campaigns to stabilised the measured resistance. The thermistors have been placed inside a thermal testbed 2 2 It provides shielding from 4 K radiation and from electromagnetic interferences and guarantees isothermal environment for all the thermistors. developed by SRON and mounted in an adiabatic demagnetisation refrigerator (ADR). It allows a base temperature below 40 mK and a very slow warm-up rate of 3.3 mK/h up to 100 mK and 0.04 K/h between 100 mK and 1 K, allowing the thermistors to be characterised in a quasi-isothermal regime. Thermistors are sequentially measured using a Lakeshore resistance bridge 370 AC, which probes a different sensor every 3 s. The collected dataset is thus spaced in such a way that it has a naturally higher weight (more data points) for $T \\leq$ 1 K (primary range of interest), relative to $T \\geq$ 1 K where the warm-up rate is $∼$ 6 K/h. More details about the measurement and the thermal testbed are reported in [23] . Here we would compare the MVRH calibration procedure against the most common calibration equations (described in Section 3 ) in order to evaluate how well the sensor calibration can be represented by the selected fit functions. The standard deviation of the fit can be used as an estimate of the temperature uncertainty and it is determined by the following equation [24] : $$ \\sigma\_{fit}^{2} = \\frac{∑ i = 0 N ( T\_{i} - T\_{i\_{calc}} )^{2}}{N - n\_{fit}} = \\frac{N}{N - n\_{fit}} Δ T\_{RMS}^{2} $$ where $T\_{i}$ and $T\_{i\_{calc}}$ are the measured and the calculated temperature for point $i$ , respectively, $N$ is the number of data points in fit range, $n\_{fit}$ is the number of fit coefficients and $Δ T\_{RMS}$ is the root mean square deviation of the fit. Note that for $N ≫ n$ , as in our case, $\\sigma\_{fit} ≈ Δ T\_{RMS}$ .
Because the temperature range explored in this paper goes below 1 K, considering the root mean square of the absolute deviation of the fit might be misleading as can be deduced from the two hypothetical fit results (Fit 1 and Fit 2) showed as general examples in Table 3 . Even though Fit 1 shows a better $Δ T\_{RMS}$ $=$ 0.2 K compared to Fit 2, it reports an error of 80% in the calculated value at $T\_{1}$ $=$ 0.05 K. On the other hand, Fit 2 reports a relative error of 0.24% at $T\_{1}$ $=$ 0.05 K and 0.75% at $T\_{2}$ $=$ 40 K (against the 0.5% for Fit 1). For this reason, instead of $Δ T\_{RMS}$ , we consider the root mean square relative deviation of fit $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}$ expressed in Eq. (18) as a criterion to assess the fitting ability of calibration equations: $$ Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}^{2} = \\frac{1}{N} ∑ i = 0 N ( \\frac{T\_{i} - T\_{i\_{calc}}}{T\_{i\_{calc}}} )^{2} $$ which confirms, coming back to the example in Table 3 , that Fit 2 is better than Fit 1 over the full range of temperatures.
The relative root mean square deviation is used here as a comparative metric to evaluate different calibration equations applied to the same resistance–temperature dataset. Uncertainty contributions from the reference thermometer and possible correlations between measurement points are common to all methods considered and therefore do not affect their relative performance.
The comparison consists of applying the MVRH procedure described in Section 2 for all the thermistors under test. This means using the $R ( T )$ function defined in Eq. (4) to fit the resistance $-$ temperature data and then inverting the $R ( T )$ function to fit the temperature $-$ resistance data with the $T ( R )$ function expressed in Eq. (7) . The number of fit coefficients needed to get the desired $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}^{2}$ are listed in Table 4 .
The four calibration equations listed in Table 2 have been applied to the same four thermistors dataset, searching for the order of polynomial required to reach the same (or better) fit accuracy (expressed by $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}^{2}$ ) as that realised with the MVRH procedure. A full comparison between the calibration equations and the thermistors under test is reported in Table 4 , while the quality of the fit of each calibration function and the corresponding relative residual $Δ T\_{rel} = ( T\_{i} - T\_{i\_{calc}} ) / T\_{i\_{calc}}$ are shown in Fig. 2 .

## 5 Discussion

In Table 4 we report the outcomes of the MVRH procedure separating the two fits. It is worth mentioning that although we used 6 coefficients in the first $R ( T )$ fit of the MVRH, 4 fit coefficients can already be used to approximate the conduction of the carrier transport in the RuO $_{2}$ thermistors over the whole temperature range, with only a factor 2 larger $Δ T_{rel\_{RMS}}$ .
From the bottom panels in Fig. 2 we see that MVRH gives a high accuracy over the full temperature range using a number of fit coefficients $n\_{fit} ∈ [ 4 , 10 ]$ . It is worth noting that to reach the same accuracy, the Chebyshev polynomial needs $n\_{fit} = 51$ , while the expanded series of the basic equation can only restrict the number to $n\_{fit} ∈ [ 14 , 16 ]$ . In comparison, the phenomenological model is not able to fit the measured data over the full range. Only after breaking the range down into multiple smaller temperature intervals it is possible to obtain sub-sets of the data over which $\\alpha$ is sufficiently linear to apply PM or CP. The main advantage of the MVRH method is that it can deliver an accurate calibration with a limited number of coefficients over the full temperature range (40 mK–40 K), even when $\\alpha$ is nonlinear (see Fig. 1 (b)). As expected, the advantage of the MVRH model decreases as soon as we reduce the temperature range, e.g. up to 5 K, as for two Ge thermistors where $n\_{fit} = 21$ for CP (Eq. (12) ), $n\_{fit} = 5$ and $n\_{fit} = 3$ for BE (Eq. (11) ) and PM (Eq. (16) ), respectively.
The three bottom panels in Fig. 2 highlight once more why we consider the relative residual of the fit to establish the quality of the fit. We see, for instance, that the Chebyshev polynomial can give a better fit, in particular between 30 K and 40 K, but it is not capable to accurate estimate the temperature near 50 mK, where oscillation are visible in the fit and the relative error is $≈ 2 . 5$ %.
As already said, stringent requirements in temperature reading and in temperature control are usually defined for the coldest stage of the cooler where the sensitive part of the experiment is located. For such applications it is thus very desirable to have a relative error that is as small as possible at low temperatures, e.g. 50 mK, rather than at 40 K, where a 2.5% error in temperature reading is acceptable and the temperature stability does not play a crucial role.
In Fig. 3 we show the $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}$ as a function of the number of fit coefficients used for the calibration equations defined in Section 3 for each of the thermistors under test. It shows once more the advantage in using the MVRH model, especially when considering the whole temperature range as in the RuO $_{2}$ cases. We can see that Chebyshev polynomial, after some initial oscillations, improves the accuracy of the fit when increasing the order of the polynomial until a stable minimum is achieved. Eq. (11) approaches a minimum after a few iterations, but without reaching a stable one, showing oscillating and diverging (up to one order of magnitude) behaviour. On the contrary, the MVRH reaches a stable minimum after few iterations and there is no real advantage to exploring polynomial orders $k \\geq 10$ . This confirms that the MVRH is able to accurately approximate the conduction at low temperature, with only 4 to 6 fit coefficients needed to describe the $R ( T )$ function. Increasing the number of fit coefficients does not further improve the accuracy of the fit. This does not happen for the BE where the fitting procedure does not converge. It appears to keep on adding coefficients without finding a stable minimum of the rms of the relative residual. We conclude that the BE does not capture the conduction process as accurately as the MVRH, and as a consequence fails to reliably converge when fitted to a real $T ( R )$ .
Once again, the benefit of MVRH is less when the temperature range is reduced, e.g. for the Ge thermistor cases.
According to Fig. 1 (a), the thermistor with the most workable $\\alpha$ over the whole temperature range $T$ $∈$ [0.04 K, 40 K] is RX-102A-BR which combined with the MVRH procedure can provide a $Δ T_{rel}$ $=$ 0.25% at 55 mK (55 mK ± 0.13 mK), a $Δ T\_{rel}$ $=$ 0.5% at 300 mK (300 mK ± 1.5 mK) and a $Δ T\_{rel}$ $=$ 1.6% at 2 K (2 K ± 0.032 K). This highlights the fact that a proper match between thermistor and calibration function can provide a reliable temperature reading of the different stages inside the cryostat, while also ensuring the temperature stability for the coldest temperature stages where the experimental setup can perform with the highest possible performance.
Breaking the temperature interval into smaller ranges can further improve the $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}}$ for the MVRH procedure, but the advantage of doing so decreases as the number of fit coefficients obtained for the calibration equations considered in Section 3 converges to more or less to the same number.

### 5.1 MVRH applied to undersampled data set

So far we have taken into account densely populated data sets obtained during a calibration experiment run inside an ADR [23] .
Thermometer calibration is usually performed in only a few temperature points, yielding an undersampled set of data points. In Fig. 4 we show an undersampled resistance-temperature data set of a RuO $_{2}$ thermistor of the same family as RCW575 measured during a different calibration run in a dilution refrigerator. Also in this case, the MVRH quickly converges to $Δ T_{rel\_{RMS}}$ $=$ 4.1% using only 3 fit coefficients ( Fig. 4 (a)). The advantage of the MVRH vanishes when the number of fit coefficients increase up to 6, approaching the accuracy of BE ( Fig. 4 (b)). Once more, the small relative residuals at low temperatures ( $T \\leq 300$ mK) illustrate the advantage of this model for our specific application even when the amount of calibration points is quite poor.

## 5.1 MVRH applied to undersampled data set

So far we have taken into account densely populated data sets obtained during a calibration experiment run inside an ADR [23] .
Thermometer calibration is usually performed in only a few temperature points, yielding an undersampled set of data points. In Fig. 4 we show an undersampled resistance-temperature data set of a RuO $_{2}$ thermistor of the same family as RCW575 measured during a different calibration run in a dilution refrigerator. Also in this case, the MVRH quickly converges to $Δ T_{rel\_{RMS}}$ $=$ 4.1% using only 3 fit coefficients ( Fig. 4 (a)). The advantage of the MVRH vanishes when the number of fit coefficients increase up to 6, approaching the accuracy of BE ( Fig. 4 (b)). Once more, the small relative residuals at low temperatures ( $T \\leq 300$ mK) illustrate the advantage of this model for our specific application even when the amount of calibration points is quite poor.

## 6 Conclusion

In this work we report on a novel procedure based on the Mott variable-range hopping (MVRH) model to calibrate negative temperature coefficient thermistors suitable for a three orders of magnitude temperature range (from 0.040 K up to 40 K). This procedure has been successfully applied to four sensors selected from the most used families of low temperature thermistors, those being ruthenium oxide (RuO $_{2}$ ) and germanium (Ge), with differences in both resistance range and dimensionless sensitivity. Compared with the most common used calibration equations, that MVRH model is reliable in reaching a stable minimum of the root mean square of the relative residual of the fit $Δ T_{rel\_{RMS}}$ after few iterations, while other equations showed oscillating and diverging behaviour when more fit coefficients are added. MVRH reported a $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}} \\leq 1 %$ and $Δ T\_{rel\_{RMS}} \\leq 1 . 7 %$ using a number of fit coefficients $n\_{fit} ∈ [ 4 , 10 ]$ and $n\_{fit} = 4$ for RuO $\_{2}$ and Ge, respectively. None of the other fit functions can reach such a level of accuracy over the specified temperature range with the same number of fit coefficients.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Emanuele Taralli: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Sven Visser: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Roland den Hartog: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. Paul van der Hulst: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation.

A function which describes a straight line in a log–log plot is then described by: $$ \\alpha ( T ) = a ⋅ T^{b} $$ where $b$ determines the slope and $a$ the vertical offset. Eq. (A.1) can also be rewritten as: $$ \\alpha ( T ) = \\alpha\_{0} ⋅ T T 0^{b} $$ where $\\alpha\_{0} = \\alpha ( T\_{0} )$ . The dimensionless sensitivity variable $\\alpha ( T )$ , as already said, is the logarithmic derivative of $R ( T )$ in d $T$ . Therefore we can integrate $$ d ln R ( T ) = \\alpha ( T ) ⋅ d ln T $$ $$ d ln R ( T ) = \\alpha ( T ) ⋅ d ln T $$ $$ ln R ( T ) = \\int\_{T\_{0}}^{T} \\alpha\_{0} ⋅ T T 0^{b} ⋅ \\frac{d ln T}{d T} d T + Const ( T\_{0} ) $$ $$ = \\frac{\\alpha\_{0}}{T\_{0}^{b}} T b 1 b\_{T\_{0}}^{T} + Const ( T\_{0} ) $$ Because the integral is zero when $T = T\_{0}$ , we can set the Const( $T\_{0} )$ to $ln R\_{0}$ : $$ ln R ( T ) = \\frac{\\alpha\_{0}}{b ⋅ T\_{0}^{b}} T T 0 b − 1 + ln R\_{0} $$ $$ ln R ( T ) = \\frac{\\alpha\_{0}}{b ⋅ T\_{0}^{b}} T T 0 b − 1 + ln R\_{0} $$ $$ R ( T ) = R\_{0} ⋅ exp α 0 b ⋅ T T 0 − 1 $$ where R $_{0}$ and T $_{0}$ are some reference pair of temperature and resistance. Note that Eq. (A.7) is essentially a 3-parameter model, which analytically inverted (no need of Puiseux series) can eventually provide the desired $T ( R )$ as: $$ T ( R ) = T\_{0} b α 0 ln R − ln R 0 + 1^{1 / b} $$

## References

[1]. Didier Barret, Vincent Albouys, Jan-Willem den Herder, Luigi Piro, Massimo Cappi, Juhani Huovelin et al., The Athena X-ray Integral Field Unit: a consolidated design for the system requirement review of the preliminary definition phase, Experimental Astronomy (2023) 55:373–426, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10686-022-09880-7,
[2]. B. D. Jackson, H. van Weers, J. van der Kuur, R. den Hartog, H. Akamatsu, A. Argan, S. R. Bandler, M. Barbera, D. Barret, M. P. Bruijn, J. A. Chervenak, J. Dercksen, F. Gatti, L. Gottardi, D. Haas, J.-W. den Herder, C. A. Kilbourne, M. Kiviranta, T. Lam-Trong, B.-J. van Leeuwen, C. Macculi, L. Piro, S. J. Smith, ”The focal plane assembly for the Athena X-ray Integral Field Unit instrument”, Proceedings Volume 9905, Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2016: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray 99052I (2016) https://doi.org 10.1117/12.2232544.
[3]. H. J. van Weers, J. P. C. Dercksen, M. Leeman, P. van der Hulst, A. J. van der Linden, A. Q. Bennebroek, R. J. den Hartog, P. Khosropanah, B. D. Jackson, P. Roelfsema, X-IFU focal plane assembly development model design upgrade and critical technology developments, Proceedings Volume 13093, Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2024: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray; 130930Y (2024) https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3020114.
[4]. Chiachung Chen, Evaluation of resistance−temperature calibration equations for NTC, Measurement 42 (2009) 1103-1111.
[5]. H.J. Hoge, Useful procedure in least squares, and test od some equation for thermistor, Review of Scientific Instrument 59 (1988) 975-979.
[6]. Guang Liua, Liang Guoa, Chunlong Liua, Qingwen Wua, Evaluation of different calibration equations for NTC thermistor applied to high-precision temperature measurement, Measurement 120 (2018) 21-27.
[7]. Jae Pil Chunga, Se Woon Oh, A residual compensation method for the calibration equation of negative temperature coefficient thermistors, Thermochimica Acta 616 (2015) 27–32.
[8]. IJiahao Li, Jianping Sun, Ting Li, Hongjun Wang, Guangyao Wang, Jiang Pan, Zechuan Chen, Chuanji Gao, Investigation of calibration equations for NTC thermistors utilized in the deep-ocean temperature range, Measurement 207 (2023) 112394.
[9]. [9] Bureau International des Poids et Mesures, Guide to secondary thermometers, https://www.bipm.org/documents/20126/41773843/Guide-SecTh-Thermistor-Thermometry.pdf/87e2fdc8-14fc-e977-918e-b801752d06a0.
[10]. [10] Standard curve RX-102A, https://www.lakeshore.com/resources/sensors.
[11]. N. F. Mott, Conduction in non-crystalline materials, Philosophical Magazine, (1969) 19:160, 835-852, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786436908216338.
[12]. V.F. Mitin, V.V. Kholevchuk, B.P. Kolodych, Ge-on-GaAs film resistance thermometers: Low-temperature conduction and magnetoresistance, Cryogenics 51 (2011) 68–73.
[13]. B.I. Shklovskii, A.L. Efros, (1984). Variable-Range Hopping Conduction. In: Electronic Properties of Doped Semiconductors. Springer Series in Solid-State Sciences, vol 45. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-02403-49.
[14]. M. Ortuno, F. Estellés-Duart, and A.M. Somoza, Numerical Simulations of Variable-Range Hopping, Phys. Status Solidi B 2022, 259, 2100340, https://doi.org/10.1002/pssb.202100340.
[15]. N. Apsley, E. A. Davis, A. D. Yoffe, A. P. Troup, Electronic properties of ion-bombarded evaporated germanium and silicon, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 11 (24) (1978) 4983, doi:10.1088/0022-3719/11/24/027, https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3719/11/24/027.
[16]. M. Knotek, Temperature and thickness dependence of low temperature transport in amorphous silicon thin films: A comparison to amorphous germanium, Solid State Communications 17 (11) (1975) 1431–1433. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-1098(75)90619-5, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0038109875906195.
[17]. D. Duval, Rational Puiseux expansions, Compositio Mathematica 70 (2) (1989) 119–154. http://www.numdam.org/item/CM19897021190/
[18]. Guang Liu, Liang Guo1, Chunlong Liu and Qingwen Wu, Uncertainty propagation in the calibration equations for NTC thermistors, Metrologia 55 (2018) 437.
[19]. Steinhart J S and Hart S R (1968) Calibration Curves for Thermistors, Deep Sea Research, 15, 497-503.
[20]. [20] M. Matus, Temperature Measurement in Dimensional Metrology – Why the Steinhart–Hart Equation works so well (PDF), in: MacroScale 2011, Wabern, Switzerland, 2011.
[21]. S. Rudtsch, C. von Rohden, (December 2015). ”Calibration and self-validation of thermistors for high-precision temperature measurements”. Measurement. 76: 1–6. doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2015.07.028. ISSN 0263-2241.
[22]. A.S. Bennett. (1971) The calibration of thermistors over the range 0-30 C, Deep Sea Research, 19, 157-163.
[23]. [23] E. Taralli, R.H. den Hartog, S. Visser, A. Veninga, R. Groefsema, M. van Litsenburg, P. van der Hulst, E. Cucchetti, Reaching sub- μ K temperature stability through comparison of sensor technologies, JATIS in preparation.
[24]. BIPM, IEC, IFCC, ILAC, ISO, IUPAC, IUPAP, and OIML. Evaluation of measurement data — Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement. Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology, JCGM 100:2008. URL: https://www.bipm.org/documents/20126/2071204/ JCGM1002008E.pdf/cb0ef43f-baa5-11cf-3f85-4dcd86f77bd6.
